 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Medical Image Analysis
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/media
 
MED-NCA: Bio-inspired medical image segmentation
John Kalkhof
∗, Niklas Ihm
, Tim Köhler
, Bjarne Gregori, Anirban Mukhopadhyay
Darmstadt University of Technology, Karolinenplatz 5, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Dataset link: github.com/MECLabTUDA/M3D-
NCA
MSC:
41A05
41A10
65D05
65D17
Keywords:
Neural Cellular Automata
Medical image segmentation
Lightweight
 
A B S T R A C T
The reliance on computationally intensive U-Net and Transformer architectures significantly limits their 
accessibility in low-resource environments, creating a technological divide that hinders global healthcare 
equity, especially in medical diagnostics and treatment planning. This divide is most pronounced in low- and 
middle-income countries, primary care facilities, and conflict zones. We introduced MED-NCA, Neural Cellular 
Automata (NCA) based segmentation models characterized by their low parameter count, robust performance, 
and inherent quality control mechanisms. These features drastically lower the barriers to high-quality medical 
image analysis in resource-constrained settings, allowing the models to run efficiently on hardware as minimal 
as a Raspberry Pi or a smartphone. Building upon the foundation laid by MED-NCA, this paper extends 
its validation across eight distinct anatomies, including the hippocampus and prostate (MRI, 3D), liver and 
spleen (CT, 3D), heart and lung (X-ray, 2D), breast tumor (Ultrasound, 2D), and skin lesion (Image, 2D). 
Our comprehensive evaluation demonstrates the broad applicability and effectiveness of MED-NCA in various 
medical imaging contexts, matching the performance of two magnitudes larger UNet models. Additionally, we 
introduce NCA-VIS, a visualization tool that gives insight into the inference process of MED-NCA and allows 
users to test its robustness by applying various artifacts. This combination of efficiency, broad applicability, 
and enhanced interpretability makes MED-NCA a transformative solution for medical image analysis, fostering 
greater global healthcare equity by making advanced diagnostics accessible in even the most resource-limited 
environments.
1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation is dominated by large U-Net (Ron-
neberger et al., 2015; Isensee et al., 2021), and Transformer-based 
(Vaswani et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2021) models, with millions of 
parameters. Despite their success, the deployment of these models is 
often hindered by their high resource demands (Jaff et al., 2019). This 
issue is particularly pronounced in low-resource environments, such as 
primary care clinics, low- and middle-income countries, and conflict 
zones, where the lack of robust computational infrastructure severely 
limits the applicability of these technologies.
There is, therefore, a pressing need for more resource-efficient deep 
learning models that can operate effectively in constrained environ-
ments. Such models hold the promise to democratize access to ad-
vanced medical image analysis, helping to bridge the global healthcare 
gap by providing high-quality diagnostic tools to underserved regions. 
By addressing these needs, we can make important strides toward 
global healthcare equity, ensuring that advanced medical imaging capa-
bilities are accessible to all, regardless of their geographic or economic 
circumstances.
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address: john.kalkhof@gris.tu-darmstadt.de (J. Kalkhof).
Inspired by the emergent properties of biological systems, von Neu-
mann introduced Cellular Automata (Von Neumann and Burks, 1966), 
demonstrating the potential to model complex systems through simple, 
local rules. Early CAs generated intricate patterns and behaviors from 
these basic rules, but the necessity for meaningful, hand-designed rules 
constrained their adaptability and scalability, representing a substantial 
limitation in fully realizing the potential of CAs as illustrated in Fig. 1.
To solve this problem, Neural Cellular Automata (NCA) (Mordvint-
sev et al., 2020) represent the update rule using a neural network. 
This approach is inspired by the biological process of morphogene-
sis, where cells naturally self-organize and communicate to develop 
complex structures and organs. Through cell-to-cell interactions, NCAs 
show emergent behavior, with complex patterns and structures forming 
as a result of a single update rule applied iteratively to each cell. In 
segmentation, this means that instead of using a top-down approach, 
NCAs use local communication to leverage the state of the ‘‘voxe-
lated world’’ and organically grow anatomical structures in the most 
promising locations.
Despite their potential, naive NCA implementations face consider-
able challenges. The iterative application of NCAs across space and time 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2025.103601
Received 2 August 2024; Received in revised form 11 March 2025; Accepted 12 April 2025
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
Available online 28 April 2025 
1361-8415/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
J. Kalkhof et al.
Fig. 1. CAs started as a set of hand-designed rules; with the introduction of learned update rules in NCAs the first big hurdle was broken; MED-NCA solved the local communication 
constraints and high VRAM requirements and thus solved the next set of challenges in applying CAs in medical imaging.
leads to substantial VRAM requirements during backpropagation. For 
instance, processing images of size 200 × 200 demands 20 GB of VRAM, 
even when the initial model has only 70k parameters (Kalkhof et al., 
2023). Additionally, slow communication speeds between cells hinder 
the model’s effectiveness. Naive NCAs communicate only with direct 
neighbors, one step at a time, which is limiting when global information 
is needed for fine-grained segmentation tasks in medical imaging.
To overcome these limitations, we introduced Med-NCA (Kalkhof 
et al., 2023) and its three-dimensional counterpart, M3D-NCA (Kalkhof 
and Mukhopadhyay, 2023). At the core of MED-NCA (Med-NCA, M3D-
NCA) is a multi-level approach designed to address the slow local 
communication issues inherent in NCAs (Mordvintsev et al., 2020). By 
initiating segmentation on a coarser version of an image and progres-
sively transferring insights to finer levels through a hierarchical NCA 
structure, MED-NCA facilitates efficient information flow across differ-
ent scales. This multi-level approach enables the handling of complex 
segmentation tasks with improved accuracy and speed. It effectively 
bridges the gap between computational efficiency and the demand 
for precise, high-quality segmentations. By leveraging this approach, 
MED-NCA can be run on hardware as minimal as a Raspberry Pi or a 
smartphone (Kalkhof et al., 2024).
We evaluate Med-NCA and M3D-NCA across eight distinct medi-
cal image segmentation datasets, including two MRI (hippocampus and 
prostate), two CT (spleen and liver), two X-ray (lung and heart), one 
dermatology (lesion segmentation), and one ultrasound (breast cancer 
segmentation) dataset. This extensive testing demonstrates that our 
models maintain accuracy comparable to leading models such as U-
Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015), TransUnet (Chen et al., 2021), and 
nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021), while greatly reducing model parameters.
Emphasizing the critical role of model interpretability (Vellido, 
2020), we introduce a novel visualization tool, NCA-VIS, which pro-
vides insights into the NCA states and their dynamic processes. This 
tool is crucial for enhancing explainability, allowing researchers and 
clinicians to understand how the model arrives at its predictions. 
By visualizing the internal states and interactions of NCAs, NCA-VIS
helps in identifying and diagnosing potential failure cases, thereby 
increasing the transparency and reliability of the model. This enhanced 
interpretability fosters greater confidence in the model’s predictions 
and facilitates its validation in diverse clinical scenarios. These innova-
tions underscore the potential of Med-NCA and M3D-NCA as advanced 
segmentation technologies that combine high performance with acces-
sibility, paving the way for their widespread adoption in varied health-
care settings, particularly those with limited computational resources 
(illustrated in Fig. 2).
The contributions of this invited manuscript over our previously 
introduced Med-NCA and M3D-NCA are the following:
∙We greatly enhance the validation of our Med-NCA and M3D-
NCA methods by evaluating them across eight distinct datasets, 
including two MRI (hippocampus and prostate), two CT (spleen 
and liver), two X-ray (lung and heart), one dermatology (lesion 
segmentation), and one ultrasound (breast cancer segmentation) 
dataset.
∙We introduce a novel visualization tool, NCA-VIS, which lever-
ages the iterative nature of NCAs to provide users with a deeper 
understanding of the inference process and aids in detecting 
failure cases.
∙We conduct a series of robustness experiments using NCA-VIS 
to better understand the failure cases and improve the overall 
trustworthiness of our models.
2. Background
In order to understand Neural Cellular Automata, we first need to 
look at Cellular Automata (CA), which were first introduced by Von Neu-
mann and Burks (1966). These early models laid the foundation for 
the development of NCAs, which combine CA principles with neural 
networks to achieve greater complexity and adaptability.
2.1. Cellular automata
Cellular Automata are mathematical models operating in discrete 
time and space systems with a finite set of discrete states. The state 
of a single automaton is defined solely by the values stored in its cell. 
Based on the current state of an automaton and its neighboring cells, 
typically adjacent ones, an update is performed using a definite set 
of hand-designed rules (Wolfram, 1983). The probably most widely-
known cellular automaton is Conway’s Game of Life (Gardner, 1970), 
which operates by four simple update rules. Depending on the number 
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
2 
J. Kalkhof et al.
Fig. 2. Med-NCA is lightweight, due to its minimal parameter size; Versatile in terms 
of input modality and anatomy; enables visualization of the inference process due to 
iterative nature and channel states.
of alive neighbors and the current state of a cell, the cell will be alive or 
dead in the next iteration. Despite the simplicity of its rules, Conway’s 
Game of Life has been used to construct a Turing machine (Rendell, 
2011), demonstrating the powerful potential of simple rules operating 
within a complex world.
2.2. Neural Cellular Automata
Neural Cellular Automata (Mordvintsev et al., 2020) represents 
a considerable advance over traditional Cellular Automata as they 
overcome the limitations of finding meaningful hand-designed rules. 
The ability to automatically learn a goal by combining deep learning 
and CA principles opens up a wide range of possible applications. Early 
attempts in this direction included learning automata dynamics (Wulff 
and Hertz, 1992) and, more recently, representing the game of life 
using convolutional neural networks (Gilpin, 2019).
In Mordvintsev et al. (2020), the concept of deep learning-based CAs 
was extended by introducing stochasticity into the update rules. This 
approach, inspired by the process of biological morphogenesis, incorpo-
rates a concept known as the fire rate. The fire rate involves the random 
activation of cells, which forces the model to learn robustness and 
maintain its structure even when faced with uncertain update paths. 
This stochastic activation mimics the natural variability and adaptabil-
ity seen in biological systems during morphogenesis. Mordvintsev et al. 
(2020) demonstrate this by successfully growing a salamander image 
that remains resilient to perturbations, showcasing the potential of 
NCAs to handle complex and dynamic tasks through adaptive growth.
Unlike typical CAs, the states of NCAs are continuous values and 
generally have multiple dimensions. This increases the capacity of 
information each cell can store between update steps and allows NCAs 
to represent and process more complex data. This additional level of 
complexity allows NCAs to perform more demanding tasks and adapt 
to a wider range of scenarios.
2.3. NCA-specific concepts
Neural Cellular Automata distinguish themselves from traditional 
deep learning models, such as UNet-based architectures, by iteratively 
applying the same model across both spatial and temporal dimensions 
of an image. This approach relies on several unique concepts:
Perceptive Range: In NCAs, communication occurs locally between 
neighboring cells, resulting in a gradual increase in the perceptive 
range with each iterative step. For instance, to propagate information 
across a 100 × 100 image, at least 100 steps would be needed for full 
communication across the entire image.
Channel Size: NCAs store and communicate information through 
their 𝑐 channels, where each channel represents a vector stored in each 
pixel or voxel of the spatial domain. The capacity of these vectors, or 
channel size, dictates the amount of information that can be stored 
and processed. Increasing the channel size can enhance the model’s 
performance in complex tasks, such as segmentation, by allowing for 
more detailed and nuanced representations of the input data.
Fire Rate: The fire rate in NCAs refers to the stochastic activation of 
each cell during the iterative process. Typically, this is implemented by 
resetting inactive cells to their previous state at each step. Commonly 
set to 50% in literature, the fire rate functions similarly to a dropout 
mechanism at the pixel level, introducing regularization and preventing 
overfitting by ensuring that not all cells are active simultaneously.
3. Related work
Initial studies on NCAs, such as those that learned the rules of Con-
way’s Game of Life (Gilpin, 2019) and the ‘‘Growing NCA’’ study (Mord-
vintsev et al., 2020), provided insights into the potential of NCAs, 
demonstrating their ability to handle perturbations and generate com-
plex patterns.
3.1. NCA-based segmentation models
The first notable application of NCAs in image segmentation was 
demonstrated through foreground-background segmentation (Sandler 
et al., 2020). These early successes revealed the capabilities of NCAs 
but were limited to relatively simple tasks and small-scale images, 
not fully utilizing the potential of NCAs in more complex scenarios. A 
substantial barrier to their broader application has been the high VRAM 
requirements for training NCAs on larger images.
To address these limitations, recent advancements have introduced 
models specifically designed for medical image segmentation. Our pre-
viously introduced Med-NCA (Kalkhof et al., 2023) and its three-
dimensional counterpart (Kalkhof and Mukhopadhyay, 2023), M3D-
NCA, represent noteworthy progress in this area. These models employ 
a multi-scale approach to segmentation, processing images at different 
resolutions to manage VRAM usage more effectively. By iterating on 
downscaled versions of the input image and gradually refining the 
segmentation at higher resolutions, these models reduce computational 
demands while maintaining accuracy.
Med-NCA focuses on 2D segmentation tasks, while M3D-NCA ex-
tends these techniques to 3D images. Both models incorporate training 
strategies, such as batch duplication, to enhance stability and conver-
gence during training. These innovations enable the effective appli-
cation of NCAs to large-scale medical images, overcoming previous 
challenges related to VRAM and slow communication.
Med-NCA has demonstrated the ability to perform high-resolution 
medical image segmentation even on low-power devices such as the 
Raspberry Pi, achieving competitive results in hippocampus and
prostate segmentation while being 500 times smaller than traditional 
UNet-based models. It also shows robustness against MRI acquisi-
tion artifacts and invariance to image scale, shape, and translation. 
Similarly, M3D-NCA has outperformed much larger UNet models in 
hippocampus and prostate segmentation and can operate efficiently in 
resource-constrained environments (Kalkhof et al., 2024). Additionally, 
M3D-NCA introduces a novel quality metric to detect segmentation 
errors automatically, enhancing reliability and patient safety.
The development of MED-NCA (Med-NCA, M3D-NCA) highlights 
the potential of NCAs to provide high-quality, efficient, and adaptive 
segmentation solutions in medical imaging. By addressing critical issues 
of resource constraints and model scalability, these models pave the 
way for broader adoption of NCAs in practical, real-world medical 
applications, particularly in low-resource settings, thus contributing to 
bridging the global healthcare gap.
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
3 
J. Kalkhof et al.
Fig. 3. MED-NCA uses NCAs on multiple levels to combine coarse with high-resolution information. By patchifying on the higher levels, the VRAM is drastically reduced enabling 
training of 3D high-resolution segmentation tasks; orange arrows indicate different model phases, with black representing the initial phase.
3.2. UNet and transformer-based segmentation models
UNet-based segmentation models, including the original UNet (Ron-
neberger et al., 2015), nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021), and transformer-
based UNet architectures (Chen et al., 2021), have become integral 
in medical image analysis. The original UNet employs a symmet-
ric encoder–decoder architecture with skip connections, enabling ac-
curate localization and effective integration of contextual informa-
tion. nnUNet enhances this by automatically adapting its configura-
tion to different datasets, optimizing performance without extensive 
manual tuning. Transformer-based UNet models incorporate attention 
mechanisms, improving the capture of long-range dependencies and 
contextual information handling.
Despite their popularity and the advancements they bring, these 
models have several limitations. The high parameter counts in UNet 
and its variants lead to increased computational complexity and their 
substantial memory footprint, makes deployment on limited hardware 
challenging. Additionally, the demanding infrastructure requirements 
limit the accessibility and scalability of these models in practical appli-
cations. While nnUNet introduces auto-ml strategies and augmentations 
to enhance robustness, the core architecture of UNet has seen limited 
changes in the past eight years, leading to stagnation and incremental 
improvements.
4. Methodology
Our previously introduced Med-NCA for 2D and M3D-NCA archi-
tecture for 3D solve two major problems when training NCAs for 
segmentation tasks on high-resolution images.
Communication speed: Due to the local communication of NCAs 
in a naive setup to communicate across a 200 × 200 pixel image 200 
steps are needed. Finding an update rule that is stable for this number 
of steps is difficult. This is solved by applying NCAs in a multi-level 
setup. It starts on a coarse resolution to get general global information, 
then this information is scaled to the next higher resolution level and 
introduces more fine granular information resulting in greatly increased 
communication speeds.
VRAM requirements: Despite their small model sizes of 10k-70k 
parameters (Kalkhof et al., 2023), NCAs require extensive amounts of 
VRAM during training due to the necessity to keep duplications of the 
model across space and time in the VRAM for backpropagation. By 
introducing patchified training into MED-NCA on the lower levels of the 
architecture, the required VRAM is effectively reduced. The amount of 
reduction can be controlled by the number of levels and scaling factors 
to suit the needs of the device at hand.
4.1. Med-NCA / M3D-NCA training
Med-NCA and M3D-NCA share a common goal: to reduce VRAM 
requirements and improve communication speed by addressing the 
local communication bottleneck. These challenges are approached by 
operating on different scales of the input image using the same model 
architecture 𝑚 across scales but with a different set of weights 𝛿𝑛. 
Following a coarse-to-fine approach, we begin by downscaling the input 
image by a factor 𝑑 multiplied by the number of layers 𝑛.
Med-NCA uses two levels of NCAs to perform segmentation. The first 
NCA model 𝑚1 iterates for 𝑠 steps on the smallest scale to initialize 
the segmentation process as illustrated in Fig. 3. The output ̄𝑥, now 
containing global information, is then upscaled. In the next step, the 
first channel of the upscaled output, which still contains the low-
resolution image, is replaced with its high-resolution counterpart. This 
allows the next model 𝑚2 to further refine the output while utilizing the 
gathered global information. To reduce VRAM usage, a random patch 
𝑝 is selected on level two, which is the same size as the smallest scale, 
and 𝑚2 is applied iteratively for 𝑠 steps. Finally, backpropagation is 
performed with a Dice focal loss (Lin et al., 2017) computed over the 
last patch and the ground truth patch.
M3D-NCA follows a similar strategy but is specifically optimized 
for 3D images. It uses a smaller model architecture to adjust to the 
increased memory requirements of 3D data. Additionally, M3D-NCA 
improves on the original Med-NCA architecture, by moving from a two-
level to an n-level architecture, thus repeating the patchification for 
𝑛−1 times. Every additional level further reduces VRAM usage. The 
additional complexity of the extra levels makes convergence less stable. 
Hence, we introduced batch duplication, which duplicates the same 
input, but with a random different patch selection, thus generalizing 
over the stochastic components of the training pipeline. We provide 
pseudo-code of training and inference of MED-NCA in Algorithm 1.
In both Med-NCA and M3D-NCA, the segmentation loss (Dice focal 
loss) is computed over the last patch and the ground truth patch. 
Adjusting 𝑑 and 𝑛 allows precise control over VRAM usage during train-
ing, making these models highly adaptable to varying computational 
resources.
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
4 
J. Kalkhof et al.
Fig. 4. The NCA-Vis tool offers insight into the inference process of the trained NCA in multiple steps of the process. Applying artifacts to the input data can help the user to 
evaluate the robustness of the model. The visualization of all channels can give further insight into the model states beyond the output segmentation.
Algorithm 1 Training and Inference of MED-NCA with 2 Levels
1: 𝑁𝐶𝐴coarse ←InitNCAModel()
2: 𝑁𝐶𝐴fine ←InitNCAModel()
3: 𝐢← Image 𝐈∈R𝐶×𝐷×𝐻×𝑊
4: 𝐠𝐭← Groundtruth 𝐆∈R𝐶×𝐷×𝐻×𝑊
5: 𝐱← Concatenate(𝐢, EmptyChannels(𝐶−1))
⊳ Coarse Level
6: 𝐱coarse ← Downscale(𝐱, 𝑑)
7: for stepscoarse do
8:  
𝐱coarse ←𝑁𝐶𝐴coarse(𝐱coarse)
9: end for
⊳ Fine Level
10: 𝐱fine ← Upscale(𝐱coarse)
11: 𝐱fine[0, ∶, ∶, ∶] ←𝐢[0, ∶, ∶, ∶]
12: if Phase = ‘‘Train’’ then
13:  
𝐱fine ←𝐺𝑒𝑡𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚𝑃𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ(𝐱fine)
14: end if
15: for stepsfine do
16:  
𝐱fine ←𝑁𝐶𝐴fine(𝐱fine)
17: end for
18: if Phase = ‘‘Train’’ then
19:  
SegLoss(𝐱fine[1, ∶, ∶, ∶], getPatch(gt)).optimize()
20: else
21:  
return 𝐱fine[1, ∶, ∶, ∶]
22: end if
4.2. Backbone NCA architecture
The core architectures of Med-NCA and M3D-NCA are designed 
for simplicity. For Med-NCA, the output of two 2D convolutions with 
kernel size 𝑘 is appended with the identity of the current cell state of 
depth 𝑐, resulting in a state vector 𝑣 of length 3𝑐. For M3D-NCA this has 
been further simplified to a single 3D convolution, thus resulting in 𝑣
being length 2𝑐. This vector 𝑣 merges information about surrounding 
cells and the current cell’s stored knowledge. 𝑣 is then passed through 
a 1 × 1 × 1 convolution of size ℎ, followed by a BatchNorm layer (Ioffe 
and Szegedy, 2015) and a ReLU activation. Finally, another 1 × 1 × 1 
convolution with output size 𝑐, matching the input size, allows the 
model’s output to be added as an incremental update to the previous 
state. The model executes this process for 𝑠 steps. Generally, the steps 
should be chosen to allow for communication across the whole image. 
We provide the following formula as a general guideline for the choice 
of the step count: 𝑠= 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ, ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, 𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ)∕((𝑘−1)∕2) (Kalkhof and 
Mukhopadhyay, 2023)
4.3. Batch duplication
Training NCA models such as M3D-NCA is unstable due to stochas-
tic cell activation and the random patchification process, especially 
with three or more layers. These factors cause fluctuations in the loss 
function, hindering convergence.
We addressed this, by introducing batch duplication in M3D-NCA. 
This technique involves duplicating input images within each batch, 
reducing image diversity per batch but greatly enhancing convergence 
stability. By averaging over the variations from stochastic activations 
and patchification, batch duplication ensures a smoother loss trajectory 
and more reliable training, improving the model’s performance and 
robustness in 3D image segmentation (Kalkhof and Mukhopadhyay, 
2023).
4.4. Pseudo ensemble
The inherent stochasticity of Neural Cellular Automata (NCAs), re-
sulting from random cell activations, allows them to generate multiple 
valid segmentation masks. We harness this characteristic by running the 
trained model ten times on the same data input, each time with differ-
ent random activations. By averaging these ten masks, we exploit the 
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
5 
J. Kalkhof et al.
Fig. 5. Random activation in NCAs result in slightly different predictions at each 
forward pass of the inference; By taking the mean, we can simulate a pseudo ensemble 
predicting more robust results.
model’s variability to produce a more robust prediction, as illustrated 
in Fig. 5.
4.5. NQM score
In medical image segmentation, detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) 
data is crucial as it can lead to inaccurate segmentations (Gonzalez 
et al., 2021). To address this issue, we introduced the NCA Quality 
Metric (NQM) (Kalkhof and Mukhopadhyay, 2023), which quantifies 
the reliability of segmentation predictions.
The NQM utilizes the variance observed in multiple predictions. 
Typically, higher variance indicates that the data differs from the 
training set, suggesting potential inaccuracies. However, raw variance 
can be misleading due to its dependence on the segmentation mask size. 
To account for this, we normalize the variance by dividing the sum 
of the standard deviations by the number of mean segmented pixels, 
ensuring a more accurate assessment of prediction reliability. Given an 
image volume 𝑣 and 𝑣𝑖 representing 𝑁= 10 different predictions of 
M3D-NCA for 𝑣, the NQM is calculated by: 
𝑁𝑄𝑀=
∑
𝑠∈𝑆𝐷(𝑠)
∑
𝑚∈𝜇(𝑚) ,
𝑆𝐷=
√∑𝑁
𝑖=1(𝑣𝑖−𝜇)2
𝑁
,
𝜇=
∑𝑁
𝑖=1 𝑣𝑖
𝑁
(1)
4.6. NCA-VIS
Neural Cellular Automata (NCAs) possess an iterative nature, with 
information retained in the cell state between steps, making them
uniquely suited for visualizing the inference process. To leverage this 
potential and enhance model explainability, we have developed NCA-
VIS, a comprehensive visualization tool designed to provide detailed 
insights into the model’s functioning, as illustrated in Fig. 4. This 
tool is built around key components: data selection and augmentation, 
threshold adjustment, and channel visualization, all of which contribute 
to improved transparency and reliability of the model’s results.
Data Selection and Augmentation: NCA-VIS allows users to se-
lect specific samples from the dataset, facilitating the examination of 
individual cases, such as out-of-distribution samples or those flagged 
by the NQM quality metric due to high variance between multiple 
predictions. Users can introduce artifacts by drawing on the images to 
assess the model’s robustness. Additionally, leveraging TorchIO (Pérez-
García et al., 2021), users can apply modular augmentations to the test 
dataset, evaluating the model’s performance under various conditions. 
This feature is crucial for understanding how the model handles diverse 
data scenarios.
Threshold Adjustment: NCAs do not have a fixed upper or lower 
bound for visualization values, which can vary strongly between in-
ference runs and datasets. NCA-VIS addresses this by employing au-
tomatic threshold adjustment based on identified values, with the 
option for manual refinement. This ensures optimal use of the color 
scale, highlighting important details and enhancing the visibility of 
critical differences. Such flexibility guarantees that the visualizations 
accurately reflect the model’s behavior and the data’s variability.
Channel Visualization: This component provides a comprehensive 
overview of all NCA channels, offering insights into the Med-NCA’s 
responses to various image-specific artifacts. Users can visualize not 
only the main segmentation channel but also the typically hidden 
channels where the model stores intermediate knowledge. This visu-
alization can be explored as a video or frame-by-frame, allowing for 
detailed analysis of patterns and behaviors. Users can also examine the 
variance between forward passes, identifying challenging areas within 
the image. Moreover, NCA-VIS supports rendering visualizations in 
both 2D and 3D formats, accommodating different input data types and 
enhancing overall analysis.
5. Experimental results
5.1. Datasets
To ensure a comprehensive evaluation of our MED-NCA architec-
ture, we have conducted comprehensive experiments across eight di-
verse datasets, encompassing various modalities and anatomical struc-
tures. This broad spectrum of datasets greatly expands the scope of our 
investigation compared to prior studies. The datasets utilized include:
MRI Hippocampus: Comprising 195 3D T1-weighted images of 
patients, sourced from the Medical Segmentation Decathlon. The im-
ages are uniformly scaled to dimensions of 64 × 64 × 56 to ensure 
comparability.
MRI Prostate: This dataset includes 32 labeled T2-weighted
prostate scans, from the Medical Segmentation Decathlon (Simpson 
et al., 2019; Antonelli et al., 2022), scaled to 320 × 320 × 24.
CT Liver: Consists of 140 labeled contrast-enhanced CT images that 
include pre- and post-therapy scans from primary cancer patients, part 
of the Medical Segmentation Decathlon, and scaled to 192 × 192 × 128.
CT Spleen: Features 41 labeled CT scans, obtained from the Medical 
Segmentation Decathlon. These images are scaled to a uniform size of 
256 × 256 × 64 for consistent analysis, with dimensions specified upon 
final dataset preparation.
X-ray Lung: Encompasses 2000 labeled X-ray scans, from the Chest 
X8 dataset (Wang et al., 2017). The segmentation masks are provided 
by the CheXMask database (Gaggion et al., 2024). These are scaled to 
256 × 256.
X-ray Heart: Includes 2000 labeled X-ray scans from the Padchest 
dataset (Bustos et al., 2020) with the masks provided by the CheXMask 
database (Gaggion et al., 2024), and scaled to 256 × 256.
RGB Dermatology: Consists of 2596 images from the ISIC 2018 
dataset (Tschandl et al., 2018; Codella et al., 2019), focusing on skin 
lesion segmentation tasks, scaled to 256 × 256.
Ultrasound Breast Cancer: Comprises a total of 780 ultrasound 
images, including benign, malignant, and normal cases, from the BUID 
Breast Cancer dataset (Al-Dhabyani et al., 2020). These are scaled to 
256 × 256, with 546 for training and 234 for testing.
For all datasets, we maintain a consistent split of 70% for training 
and 30% for testing. The uniform scaling of images across all datasets is 
critical not only to conform to the limitations of the U-Net architecture 
but also to ensure comparability across different model evaluations.
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
6 
J. Kalkhof et al.
Fig. 6. Comparison of Dice accuracy and parameter count for MED-NCA, UNet, and Transformer-based architectures across eight diverse datasets.
Table 1
Dice accuracy with standard deviations across the eight datasets. We use the according 2D/3D architecture of MED-NCA, UNet, and nnUNet depending on the shape of the 
dataset. less than 105 parameters; more than 107 parameters; more than 108 parameters.
 Method
3D
2D
 
 
Hippocampus
Prostate
Liver
Spleen
Dermatology
Breast
Lung
Heart
AVG  
 MED-NCA
0.882 ± 0.019
0.795 ± 0.101
0.812 ± 0.077
0.743 ± 0.095
0.772 ± 0.195
0.635 ± 0.308
0.941 ± 0.052
0.947 ± 0.044
0.816 
 UNet
0.877 ± 0.020
0.793 ± 0.143
0.746 ± 0.317
0.778 ± 0.303
0.860 ± 0.152
0.537 ± 0.306
0.954 ± 0.050
0.958 ± 0.031
0.813 
 nnUNet
0.903 ± 0.024
0.817 ± 0.257
0.962 ± 0.023
0.971 ± 0.007
0.903 ± 0.118
0.760 ± 0.312
0.966 ± 0.038
0.965 ± 0.026
0.906 
 TransUNet 2D
0.851 ± 0.033
0.868 ± 0.031
0.949 ± 0.018
0.952 ± 0.023
0.903 ± 0.110
0.711 ± 0.354
0.964 ± 0.037
0.963 ± 0.028
0.895 
5.2. Infrastructure
All experiments were conducted on a system with an Nvidia RTX 
3090 GPU and an Intel i7-12700 processor, with all models imple-
mented in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). The implementations of 
Med-NCA and M3D-NCA are available at , which will be updated with 
the NCA-VIS tool upon acceptance. We use Med-NCA as defined in 
the original paper for images of size 256 × 256 with a step count of 
64 (Kalkhof et al., 2023). As our 3D datasets show greater variations, 
we set the kernel size on each level to 7 and a step count of 20, while 
we use a two-level architecture, except for the hippocampus dataset 
as it is small enough to be handled by a single level. For the prostate 
dataset, following the approach in our M3D-NCA publication, we use 
step counts of 20 and 40 (Kalkhof and Mukhopadhyay, 2023). For 
the baselines, we used the official implementation of UNet (Perez-
Garcia, 2019), nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021) and the model architecture 
provided for TransUNet in (Chen et al., 2021). All models are optimized 
with the Adam optimizer (Adam, 2024).
6. Quantitative results
The quantitative results of our study, presented in Table 1, under-
score the efficacy of MED-NCA across various medical image segmenta-
tion tasks. Remarkably, despite being 2–3 orders of magnitude smaller 
than current state-of-the-art models, MED-NCA achieves performance 
comparable to UNet, demonstrating its efficiency and robustness (see 
Fig. 6).
For segmentation tasks involving the hippocampus, prostate, lung, 
and heart, the performance of MED-NCA closely matches that of UNet. 
Notably, for ultrasound breast and CT liver tasks, MED-NCA surpasses 
UNet by 6.6–9.8%, whereas UNet outperforms MED-NCA by 3.5-8.8% 
in CT spleen and image lesion tasks. When averaged across all eight 
datasets, the performance of both models is similar. This is particularly 
noteworthy given that all MED-NCA configurations contain fewer than 105
parameters, making them at least two orders of magnitude smaller than the 
corresponding UNet. It is plausible that further hyperparameter tuning 
could narrow the performance gaps observed in specific datasets, an 
area not fully explored in our study. We show this through an ablation 
study on the breast and liver dataset, demonstrating that there is no 
universally optimal number of steps, as shown in Table 2.
There remains a noticeable performance gap between standard 
UNet and MED-NCA compared to nnUNet and TransUNet, particu-
larly in more complex datasets such as MRI prostate, CT liver, image 
lesion, and ultrasound breast. However, this disparity could likely 
be mitigated through a more advanced training pipeline, similar to 
the one employed by nnUNet, which utilizes extensive preprocessing 
and augmentations during training. However, nnUNet and TransUNet 
models are not feasible on low-end hardware due to their extensive 
computational requirements, hence preventing them from fulfilling our 
target of being operable in resource-constrained environments.
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
7 
J. Kalkhof et al.
Fig. 7. Qualitative results of MED-NCA, UNet, nnUNet, and TransUnet across eight datasets (hippocampus, prostate, liver, spleen, heart, lung, breast tumor, and dermatology). 
MED-NCA consistently produces smoother and more coherent segmentations, particularly in the dermatology, hippocampus, and breast tumor datasets. In contrast, UNet often 
predicts additional volumes, leading to over-segmentation, especially noticeable in the ultrasound and X-ray lung results.
Table 2
Evaluating MED-NCA across different step counts reveals no universally optimal number 
of steps. Instead, it functions as a hyperparameter that should be fine-tuned based on 
the dataset and required perceptive range.
 Dataset
Steps
Dice
 
 
Breast
16
0.565 ± 0.276 
 
32
0.611 ± 0.287 
 
64
0.635 ± 0.308 
 
Liver
10
0.846 ± 0.062 
 
20
0.812 ± 0.077 
 
30
0.779 ± 0.062 
Overall, our results highlight the potential of MED-NCA as a highly 
efficient and effective model for medical image segmentation. Its ability 
to achieve comparable performance with lower computational require-
ments positions it as a valuable tool for resource-constrained envi-
ronments. By adopting more advanced training techniques, as demon-
strated by nnUNet, MED-NCA’s performance could be further enhanced, 
potentially closing the gap with the leading models while still remain-
ing suitable for resource-constrained settings (see Table 2).
7. Qualitative results
The qualitative results in Fig. 7 illustrate that across all eight 
datasets, the four segmentation models — MED-NCA, UNet, nnUNet, 
and TransUNet — primarily differ in their handling of the edges of 
the segmentation regions. For each dataset, including the hippocampus, 
prostate, liver, spleen, heart, lung, breast tumor, and skin lesion, the 
models generally show similar performance in terms of overall seg-
mentation accuracy. However, MED-NCA consistently tends to produce 
smoother segmentations.
In particular, MED-NCA’s smooth segmentation is prominently ob-
served in the dermatology, hippocampus, and breast tumor dataset, 
where the model avoids irregular edges and maintains a more coherent 
boundary. In contrast, UNet frequently predicts additional volumes, 
leading to over-segmentation in some cases, as seen in the ultrasound 
and X-ray lung results. This tendency of UNet to over-predict is less 
prevalent in MED-NCA, which results in cleaner and more accurate 
delineations of the target structures.
8. NQM score segmentation quality predictions
To further validate the reliability of the built-in quality control 
mechanism of our model, we evaluated the correlation between the 
NCA Quality Metric (NQM) and the Dice score across the four 3D 
datasets: hippocampus, prostate, spleen, and liver. These datasets were 
all trained using M3D-NCA and thus fulfilled the architecture require-
ments.
Our results in Fig. 9, where we perform a linear regression across 
all four datasets, demonstrate a strong negative correlation of −0.84 
between the NQM and the Dice score, demonstrating that higher NQM 
values reliably predict lower segmentation accuracy. This correlation 
confirms that the NQM is an effective measure for detecting potential 
segmentation failures. By integrating NQM into our framework, we can 
reasonably ensure the robustness and reliability of our 3D segmentation 
results.
9. Robustness experiments using NCA-VIS
Our novel NCA-VIS tool not only allows us to visualize the inference 
process of NCAs, providing a deeper understanding of how they react 
to unseen inputs and artifacts but also enables the application of 
augmentations and hand-drawn alterations to investigate their behavior 
further.
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
8 
J. Kalkhof et al.
Fig. 8. Robustness tests with different artifacts applied using the NCA-VIS tool.
Fig. 9. The NQM score shows a strong negative correlation of −0.84 to the Dice 
accuracy across all 3D datasets.
To demonstrate how robustness evaluation can be performed, we 
present the inference process of MED-NCA in Fig. 8. This figure shows 
how erasing and adding information to the image can cause notable 
changes in the early steps of the NCA, but also how the model manages 
to recover. In cases of noise and ghosting artifacts, the model generally 
withstands strong alterations while still achieving a good segmentation 
result.
Overall, this visualization enhances the explainability of the NCA’s 
inference process, demonstrating how iterative updates lead to the final 
prediction. It also serves as a valuable tool for assessing the model’s 
robustness and transparency, providing insights into the underlying 
mechanisms driving its performance.
10. Training VRAM requirements
MED-NCA substantially reduces VRAM requirements of NCAs dur-
ing training, enabling NCAs to process high-resolution medical images 
efficiently. This is achieved through a multi-level architecture com-
bined with patchified training. The scalability of the architecture allows 
precise control over the required VRAM by adjusting two primary 
values: the scale factor and the number of hierarchical levels.
Table 3 shows VRAM measurements for various configurations of 
MED-NCA. For instance, training on a 2D image of size 256 × 256 with 
a scale factor of 2 across two levels requires 4678 MB of VRAM. By 
increasing the scale factor to 8, VRAM consumption drastically drops 
to only 326 MB. Similarly, for 3D segmentation tasks with input sizes 
of 192 × 192 × 128, adjusting the scale factor and levels from (4, 2) to 
(4, 3) reduces VRAM usage from 7261 MB down to just 296 MB.
This demonstrates how MED-NCA can be effectively controlled to 
fit available hardware constraints.
11. Hardware requirements
Neural Cellular Automata (NCA) architectures have distinct hard-
ware resource characteristics during inference, especially concerning 
RAM usage, due to their iterative application without scaling. Unlike 
architectures such as UNets, which process the image by compressing 
information into a latent space, NCA-based models operate on the same 
image scale iteratively, reducing RAM requirements during inference.
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
9 
J. Kalkhof et al.
Fig. 10. (A) Inference Speed of MED-NCA 2D/3D and UNet 2D/3D on a Raspberry PI. (B) Max RAM used during inference on Raspberry PI (C) Inference time of Med-NCA on 
images the size 256 × 256 across different Android devices; X: out of RAM.
Table 3
VRAM requirements during training of different setups of MED-NCA (with batch size = 
1). MED-NCA can be adjusted to fit the needs of the available hardware (2D Med-NCA: 
c=32, h=128, s=64; 3D M3D-NCA: c=16, h=64, s=20).
 Input Size
Scale Factor
Level
VRAM in MB 
 
256 × 256
2
2
4678
 
 
4
2
1229
 
 
8
2
326
 
 
192 × 192 × 128
4
2
7261
 
 
8
2
2073
 
 
4
3
296
 
 
2
4
1743
 
To illustrate the efficiency of MED-NCA architectures in terms of 
memory usage, we performed experiments on resource-limited hard-
ware, specifically a Raspberry Pi 4B with only 2 GB of RAM and several 
Android smartphones. All Raspberry Pi experiments use the same Py-
Torch framework used for the experiments in this manuscript, while 
smartphone experiments utilized a TensorFlow Lite implementation 
due to mobile deployment limitations.
Our experiments, illustrated in Fig. 10, showed that MED-NCA 
greatly outperforms UNet architectures in memory usage, particularly 
evident at larger image sizes. For example, UNet models quickly ex-
haust the available RAM on a Raspberry Pi when processing 2D images 
larger than approximately 512 × 512. In contrast, Med-NCA success-
fully handles images of size 1024 × 1024. This difference becomes 
even more pronounced in 3D medical imaging, where UNet models 
are limited to a size of about 64 × 64 × 56. Contrarily, M3D-NCA 
can handle volumes up to a size of 192 × 192 × 128 without running 
out of memory. Additionally, we evaluated the inference speed on the 
Raspberry Pi, showing that NCAs are around 1.5 to 3 times faster than 
a UNet when choosing a moderate step count of 20 per level.
Furthermore, we extended our investigation to smartphones us-
ing a TensorFlow Lite implementation of Med-NCA, demonstrating 
robust performance across several Android smartphones, including a 
Pixel 1, Moto g31, Poco M5, Samsung S10, and Pixel 6a. In our 
evaluations, Med-NCA processed 256 × 256 images within reasonable 
inference times ranging from 2 to 5 s, depending on device specifica-
tions. Previously, we have even demonstrated that this TensorFlow Lite 
implementation allows for training directly on smartphones, though at 
considerably slower speeds (1–3 days depending on the device (Kalkhof 
et al., 2024)).
These experiments conclusively demonstrate that MED-NCA models 
greatly reduce RAM requirements during inference and thus bring high-
quality medical image segmentation on minimal and widely available 
hardware, promoting greater global healthcare accessibility and equity.
12. Conclusion
Our work extends the validation of the MED-NCA model, demon-
strating its capacity to overcome the limitations of traditional U-Net-
based methods in resource-constrained environments. By offering a 
low-parameter, robust, and adaptive segmentation solution, MED-NCA 
meets the critical need for accessible and high-quality medical image 
analysis in settings such as low- and middle-income countries, primary 
care facilities, and conflict zones. This advancement contributes to 
bridging the gap in global healthcare quality and equity.
MED-NCA’s low computational demands allow it to run efficiently 
on minimal hardware, such as a Raspberry Pi or a smartphone, dras-
tically lowering barriers to advanced medical image analysis. Our 
extensive validation across eight distinct anatomies — hippocampus 
and prostate (MRI, 3D), liver and spleen (CT, 3D), heart and lung 
(X-ray, 2D), breast tumor (Ultrasound, 2D), and skin lesion (Image, 
2D) — demonstrates its broad applicability and effectiveness. Despite 
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
10 
J. Kalkhof et al.
its compact size, MED-NCA matches the performance of much larger 
models like UNet, highlighting its efficiency and robustness.
The introduction of NCA-VIS further enhances the interpretability 
of MED-NCA, providing insights into its inference process and allowing 
users to test its robustness through various artifacts. This combina-
tion of efficiency, broad applicability, and enhanced interpretability 
positions MED-NCA as a transformative solution for medical image 
analysis. By making advanced diagnostics accessible in even the most 
resource-limited environments, MED-NCA fosters greater global health-
care equity and potentially improves the quality of care for underserved 
populations.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
John Kalkhof: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project ad-
ministration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data cu-
ration, Conceptualization. Niklas Ihm: Visualization, Software. Tim 
Köhler: Visualization, Software. Bjarne Gregori: Visualization, Soft-
ware. Anirban Mukhopadhyay: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Supervision, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Our current codebase, which includes the methods Med-NCA and 
M3D-NCA is available under github.com/MECLabTUDA/M3D-NCA. We 
will add the NCA-VIS visualization tool to this repository upon accep-
tance.
References
Adam, D., 2024. Medical AI could be’dangerous’ for poorer nations, WHO warns. 
Nature.
Al-Dhabyani, W., Gomaa, M., Khaled, H., Fahmy, A., 2020. Dataset of breast ultrasound 
images. Data Brief 28, 104863.
Antonelli, M., Reinke, A., Bakas, S., Farahani, K., Kopp-Schneider, A., Landman, B.A., 
Litjens, G., Menze, B., Ronneberger, O., Summers, R.M., van Ginneken, B., 
Bilello, M., Bilic, P., Christ, P.F., Do, R.K.G., Gollub, M.J., Heckers, S.H., Huis-
man, H., Jarnagin, W.R., McHugo, M.K., Napel, S., Pernicka, J.S.G., Rhode, K., 
Tobon-Gomez, C., Vorontsov, E., Meakin, J.A., Ourselin, S., Wiesenfarth, M., 
Arbeláez, P., Bae, B., Chen, S., Daza, L., Feng, J., He, B., Isensee, F., Ji, Y., Jia, F., 
Kim, I., Maier-Hein, K., Merhof, D., Pai, A., Park, B., Perslev, M., Rezaiifar, R., 
Rippel, O., Sarasua, I., Shen, W., Son, J., Wachinger, C., Wang, L., Wang, Y., 
Xia, Y., Xu, D., Xu, Z., Zheng, Y., Simpson, A.L., Maier-Hein, L., Cardoso, M.J., 
2022. The Medical Segmentation Decathlon. Nat. Commun. 13, 4128. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-30695-9, arXiv:2106.05735.
Bustos, A., Pertusa, A., Salinas, J.-M., De La Iglesia-Vaya, M., 2020. Padchest: A large 
chest x-ray image dataset with multi-label annotated reports. Med. Image Anal. 66, 
101797.
Chen, J., Lu, Y., Yu, Q., Luo, X., Adeli, E., Wang, Y., Lu, L., Yuille, A.L., Zhou, Y., 2021. 
Transunet: Transformers make strong encoders for medical image segmentation. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04306.
Codella, N., Rotemberg, V., Tschandl, P., Emre Celebi, M., Dusza, S., Gutman, D., 
Helba, B., Kalloo, A., Liopyris, K., Marchetti, M., Kittler, H., Halpern, A., 2019. 
Skin lesion analysis toward melanoma detection 2018: A challenge hosted by the 
international skin imaging collaboration (ISIC). http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
1902.03368, ArXiv E-Prints, arXiv:1902.03368.
Gaggion, N., Mosquera, C., Mansilla, L., Saidman, J.M., Aineseder, M., Milone, D.H., 
Ferrante, E., 2024. CheXmask: a large-scale dataset of anatomical segmentation 
masks for multi-center chest x-ray images. Sci. Data (ISSN: 2052-4463) 11, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41597-024-03358-1.
Gardner, M., 1970. Mathematical games. Sci. Am. 222, 132–140.
Gilpin, W., 2019. Cellular automata as convolutional neural networks. Phys. Rev. E 
100, 032402.
Gonzalez, C., Gotkowski, K., Bucher, A., Fischbach, R., Kaltenborn, I., Mukhopad-
hyay, A., 2021. Detecting when pre-trained nnu-net models fail silently for covid-19 
lung lesion segmentation. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted 
Intervention–MICCAI 2021: 24th International Conference, Strasbourg, France, 
September 27–October 1, 2021, Proceedings, Part VII 24. Springer, pp. 304–314.
Ioffe, S., Szegedy, C., 2015. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by 
reducing internal covariate shift. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. 
pmlr, pp. 448–456.
Isensee, F., Jaeger, P.F., Kohl, S.A., Petersen, J., Maier-Hein, K.H., 2021. NnU-Net: a 
self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image segmentation. 
Nature Methods 18, 203–211.
Jaff, D., Leatherman, S., Tawfik, L., 2019. Improving quality of care in conflict settings: 
access and infrastructure are fundamental. Int. J. Qual. Heal. Care.
Kalkhof, J., González, C., Mukhopadhyay, A., 2023. Med-nca: Robust and lightweight 
segmentation with neural cellular automata. In: International Conference on 
Information Processing in Medical Imaging. Springer, pp. 705–716.
Kalkhof, J., Mukhopadhyay, A., 2023. M3D-NCA: Robust 3D segmentation with built-
in quality control. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and 
Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, pp. 169–178.
Kalkhof, J., Ranem, A., Mukhopadhyay, A., 2024. Unsupervised training of neural 
cellular automata on edge devices. arXiv:2407.18114.
Lin, T.-Y., Goyal, P., Girshick, R., He, K., Dollár, P., 2017. Focal loss for dense object 
detection. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. 
pp. 2980–2988.
Mordvintsev, A., Randazzo, E., Niklasson, E., Levin, M., 2020. Growing neural cellular 
automata. Distill 5, e23.
Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., 
Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A., Kopf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., 
Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang, L., Bai, J., Chintala, S., 
2019. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In: 
Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A., d’Alché Buc, F., Fox, E., Garnett, R. 
(Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32. Curran 
Associates, Inc., URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/
bdbca288fee7f92f2bfa9f7012727740-Paper.pdf.
Perez-Garcia, F., 2019. fepegar/unet: First published version of PyTorch U-Net. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3522306.
Pérez-García, F., Sparks, R., Ourselin, S., 2021. TorchIO: a python library for efficient 
loading, preprocessing, augmentation and patch-based sampling of medical images 
in deep learning. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 208, 106236.
Rendell, P., 2011. A universal turing machine in conway’s game of life. In: 2011 
International Conference on High Performance Computing & Simulation. IEEE, pp. 
764–772.
Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T., 2015. U-net: Convolutional networks for 
biomedical image segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image 
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, pp. 234–241.
Sandler, M., Zhmoginov, A., Luo, L., Mordvintsev, A., Randazzo, E., y Arcas, B.A., 2020. 
Image segmentation via cellular automata. CoRR, arXiv:2008.04965.
Simpson, A.L., Antonelli, M., Bakas, S., Bilello, M., Farahani, K., van Ginneken, B., 
Kopp-Schneider, A., Landman, B.A., Litjens, G., Menze, B.H., Ronneberger, O., 
Summers, R.M., Bilic, P., Christ, P.F., Do, R.K.G., Gollub, M., Golia-Pernicka, J., 
Heckers, S., Jarnagin, W.R., McHugo, M., Napel, S., Vorontsov, E., Maier-Hein, L., 
Cardoso, M.J., 2019. A large annotated medical image dataset for the development 
and evaluation of segmentation algorithms. CoRR, arXiv:1902.09063.
Tschandl, P., Rosendahl, C., Kittler, H., 2018. The HAM10000 dataset, a large collection 
of multi-source dermatoscopic images of common pigmented skin lesions. Sci. Data 
5, 1–9.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, Ł., 
Polosukhin, I., 2017. Attention is all you need. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30.
Vellido, A., 2020. The importance of interpretability and visualization in machine 
learning for applications in medicine and health care. Neural Comput. Appl. 32, 
18069–18083.
Von Neumann, J., Burks, A.W., 1966. Theory of self-reproducing automata.
Wang, X., Peng, Y., Lu, L., Lu, Z., Bagheri, M., Summers, R.M., 2017. Chestx-
ray8: Hospital-scale chest x-ray database and benchmarks on weakly-supervised 
classification and localization of common thorax diseases. In: Proceedings of the 
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2097–2106.
Wolfram, S., 1983. Statistical mechanics of cellular automata. Rev. Modern Phys. 55, 
601.
Wulff, N., Hertz, J.A., 1992. Learning cellular automaton dynamics with neural 
networks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 5.
Medical Image Analysis 103 (2025) 103601 
11 
